From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
[Music]
A New York Times investigation into a
series of major deals between the Trump
administration, the United Arab
Emirates, and the Trump family has
revealed that the president and his
inner circle are making millions of
dollars from agreements that intersect
with America's national security
interests. Today, my colleague Eric
Lipton explains why these conflicts of
interest are unlike anything we've seen
before.
It's Wednesday, September 24th.
Eric, welcome to the show.
>> Hello, Rachel.
>> Eric, I feel like every time we've
talked on the show, we've had you on to
talk about some kind of conflict of
interest that has to do with either the
Trump family or the Trump
administration. and you explain each
time that what we are discussing is more
significant or problematic than the last
time we had you on the show or than
another administration.
And here we are. I think it's been about
four months since we had you on last
time. And I think that once again, this
is what you're going to tell me. Am I
right?
>> That's right. We're not talking about
martinis at the Trump hotel in DC or
staying a couple of nights at the Trump
Derell or people gathering at Mara Lago.
>> These were things that were considered
scandals during the first Trump
administration by his critics.
>> Right? This is an entirely different
scale. What we're seeing here in these
series of transactions is at a scale
unlike anything I think I've seen as a
reporter in actually four decades of
doing my job.
>> Wow. in terms of the national security
implications and just the scale of
dollars in play that are potentially
enriching the president's family and the
family of some of his adviserss.
>> So, okay, I want to dig into
specifically what we're talking about
here. You mentioned a series of
transactions. So, tell us about the
transactions.
>> I mean, one of the deals directly
financially benefits the president, his
family, and some of his adviserss. The
second deal directly benefits the United
Arab Emirates and its ambitions to
become an AI superpower.
So back in May, we have the first deal
which involves $2 billion of money from
the United Arab Emirates going into a
cryptocurrency company that was created
by the Trump family and one of his
adviserss, Steve Witco. That happens in
early May. Several weeks later, there's
a separate transaction where the United
States agrees to give in the UAE access
to some of the most advanced artificial
intelligence chips that are designed in
the United States. These are the crown
jewels of American technology and it
agrees to allow them to have hundreds of
thousands of these chips exported to the
United Arab Emirates.
So, these two deals happen. you know, my
colleagues and I are watching this and
we're like, "Wow, wait a minute. What
just happened here? How did these two
deals come about?" And so we launched on
an investigation that involved a team of
reporters, including from San Francisco,
from New York, Washington, Taiwan, and
London.
[Music]
>> I just want to make sure I understand
why this would catch your eye in the
first place. You are obviously an
investigative reporter. Did you see
these two deals and think, I wonder if
there's a connection because the UAE
transfers $2 billion to the Trump Whit
family crypto business and then the
Trump administration turns around and
hands over to the UAE hundreds of
thousands of these super important
chips. Like is that what initially piqu
your interest?
>> That's right.
>> Okay. So, what did you find? Were the
deals related and how did they come
about? So, as our team of reporters
worked on this, what we found was there
were more linkages between these two
deals than were publicly known or that
had been disclosed by the White House or
the United Arab Emirates. For example,
there's this one guy who's at the center
of both of these transactions and he
goes by the name of Shik Takun. He's the
national security chief of the United
Arab Emirates
>> and he's this kind of somewhat
mysterious figure who's constantly seen
wearing sunglasses because he has an eye
condition. So even when he's inside,
he's got these shades on and it gives
them a kind of an air of intrigue. And
he's been an intermediary for presidents
and foreign adviserss for many years.
But starting around 2023, he began to
transition to becoming one of the
leaders in deploying the UAE's massive
bank of oil money to make strategic
decisions about how to transform the
United Arab Emirates, this super rich
oil country, into becoming a place that
could raise money from some other
economic sector. And they concluded that
the best place to go to make more money
was to become a technology beacon in the
world,
>> like a Silicon Valley of the Middle
East,
>> right? They want to build one of the
largest AI data centers outside of the
United States.
>> But in order to transform their economy,
Taknon needed something for the United
States, and that was access to these AI
chips made by companies like Nvidia. and
he went to the Biden administration and
he basically said, "Give us your chips."
And initially they were quite skeptical
of that because they were concerned
about, you know, what's he going to do
with those chips?
>> Like for security reasons or what was
the concern exactly?
>> Their primary concern was that the
United Arab Emirates has had longtime
close ties with China. And not only
that, but they even have done joint
military exercises from China. They also
have a defense contracting firm that is
building military equipment jointly with
China.
>> And at the time that they first came to
the Biden administration, they had put a
bunch of Chinese equipment into some of
their data centers. And this is
equipment that the United States is
concerned potentially could be
compromised and used by China to gain
access to American technology. So the
Biden administration is concerned that
if we allow the United Arab Emirates to
have these crown jewels, some of the
most important technological inventions
of modern times, are they potentially
going to be sharing that technology with
China in a way that could hurt the
United States national security? That
was a concern that the Biden
administration had in particular.
>> Hurt the US? How exactly? Like what
specifically are they worried would
happen? I mean, the United States is now
in a race with China over the progress
in artificial intelligence. And it's not
only an economic race, it's a military
race because AI is already being applied
to all kinds of weapon systems and
particularly around drones that could be
autonomously operated and armed and
become autonomous killing machines. And
if China gets access to the most
advanced chips that the United States is
designing, they could accelerate their
efforts to build a killer drone fleet
that could threaten the United States.
>> So the stakes are obviously quite high.
The Biden administration has all of
these concerns about what a deal for
chips to the UAE could mean for American
national security. What happens after
that? I mean, the Biden administration
ultimately reaches an agreement in which
they talked to Shik Taknoo and they
said, you know, you're going to have to
remove some of this Chinese technology
from your data centers and we will then
agree to give you access to some of
these chips. But Takun is not satisfied
>> because he had seen Biden as taking this
very hard line. It sounds like
>> they were quite frustrated that the
Biden people were being too
conservative. They were too nervous.
They were nervous nellies that they were
holding back the ambitions of the United
Arab Emirates. And that was where things
ended. And then Biden leaves office. But
Tuck Nun wants more chips. He wants more
powerful chips. And that's when Trump
comes in.
And Tuck Noon, very smart guy. He sees
an opportunity here to get what he
couldn't get during the Biden era.
>> And what do you mean by that? Like what
specifically does he see as an
opportunity? Well, Trump, the dealmaker
that he is, puts in some senior
adviserss who are dealmakers themselves.
He puts in Steve Wickoff, a real estate
buddy of his from New York City. And
suddenly Wickoff is the Middle East
envoy. And then he separately puts in as
his AI advisor in the White House, David
Sox, a venture capitalist from Silicon
Valley who comes from the world that
thinks that the United States is best if
it exports as many chips as possible
around the world. And both of these guys
become critical players in Takun
strategy to get what he wants.
And so the new administration is
starting and Tuck gets to work.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
>> So, Eric, tell us about how Taknon
actually gets to work. What does he do
first? Takmoon first makes a visit to
the United States in March in which he
comes here and he's treated like he is a
major global player. He has private
meetings with the head of the CIA with
the Treasury Secretary, the commerce
secretary, with CEOs, Jeff Bezos.
>> He gets an audience with some very
important people. It sounds like
>> I mean he was starting to get that kind
of access during Biden, but this visit
in March was unlike anything he'd had
before.
>> I mean, it's just an incredible lineup
of people from both the government, from
the private sector, from the financial
world. It shows you that this guy not
only has one of the world's biggest
piggy banks, but he is a transformative
figure in the global economy and in
technology.
>> And he actually then also goes over to
the White House for a special dinner
that includes much of the president's
cabinet and President Trump and the vice
president and Steve Wickoff and David
Saxs are all there and they talk about
the interest of the United Arab Emirates
in becoming a global leader in AI. These
are initial kind of meet and greet
conversations, but in the background
there's a whole another thing going on.
The one thing that the United Arab
Emirates has is a boatload of money.
They want access to chips. They've got
trillions of dollars in the bank. World
Liberty, a cryptocurrency company
created by Donald Trump, Steve Whit, and
their families, needs money to get
going. And this is a moment that UAE can
write a check for $2 billion and hand it
over to World Liberty just at the same
moment that they're seeking access to
the chips. These two things basically
simultaneously are in play.
>> Well, I mean, basically sounds like the
UAE is essentially dangling a $2 billion
transfer into the Trump Whitaw family
business at the same time that they're
asking the administration for this
technology.
>> That's right. And to be clear, it's the
sons of both Trump and Witoff who are
overseeing World Liberty and its
dealings. And they're the ones that are
negotiating for the $2 billion transfer
into World Liberty. But regardless,
they're doing these negotiations at the
same time as their fathers are having a
sit down dinner with Shik Taknun talking
about the UAE's plans to become a global
AI superpower with the help of Trump.
[Music]
So what happens next with these
negotiations?
>> Well, it's, you know, in March and early
April, there's a clash that's playing
out behind the scenes in the White
House.
>> There's these two different groups.
There's David Saxs who comes in from
Silicon Valley is like unlimited export
of these chips. Let's sell as much as
possible. And then there's a separate
group of people that have come in in
this new Trump administration that are
effectively China hawks. They're really
skeptical of China. They're very
concerned about the military buildup in
China. And they are separately working
behind the scenes to build out a policy
that would actually further restrict
access by foreign entities to the most
advanced chips.
>> They call it the America First AI plan
that would limit the sale or export of
the most advanced chips for a year after
they come onto the marketplace, which is
not what Tucken wanted. So, it sounds
like there are at least some officials
in the Trump administration who have the
same or at least similar concerns about
where these chips are going to end up
and what they're going to be used for
that the Biden administration did,
right? Like, in other words, giving the
UAE these chips could also mean that
they end up in China and therefore the
same national security risks are
associated with it.
>> That's right. There's still a
significant concern in the intelligence
community about just how reliable the
United Arab Emirates is and whether or
not they are truly going to honor
commitments to not share this technology
with China. So you have this split in
the White House of one group of advisers
that's saying, "Hey, we got to be
careful here and the other group saying
sell." So that's a clash that's playing
out in March and April until suddenly
there's a big disruption.
>> And what is that disruption? So Laura
Loomer, a conservative activist who has
the ear of President Trump, is
frequently coming into the White House
and talking to Trump and and giving him
a list of people that she wants to see
fired.
>> And it ends up that one of the people on
that list is David Fe, who is one of the
leaders of the effort in the White House
to try to to crack down and limit the
export of the most advanced American
chips. He and a number of other folks
from the White House National Security
Team are fired within a day. So
basically the guard rails that had
existed within the White House are gone
at this point.
>> What happened was that some of the key
players that were quite concerned about
additional sharing accident. But the
biggest thing that happened was that
that was an opening for David Sachs to
become the de facto leader of this
effort.
>> And Sax comes in. Yeah, let's sell as
many chips as possible because it will
benefit the United States. So the fight
in the White House over whether to sell
these chips to Takun and to the UAE, it
sounds like it's now leaning very
heavily in favor of doing a deal. What
is going on with the other negotiation
between the UAE and World Liberty at
this point?
>> So the first thing that happens is that
$2 billion moves from the United Arab
Emirates to World Liberty in early May.
And effectively overnight, World Liberty
becomes one of the largest stable coin
crypto companies in the world. And it
turns what was a startup with an
uncertain future into one of the biggest
players in the crypto space in the
world. And that single action by the
United Arab Emirates is going to make
the owners of World Liberty tens of
millions of dollars a year.
>> Wow.
>> That's done. That deal is done. But the
chips deal isn't yet decided. And then
basically the UAE comes in and says,
"You know what? We don't just want a
100,000 chips. We want 500,000 chips.
And we want the most advanced chips.
This happens in May while this debate is
playing out. And some of the people from
the White House and from the Trump
administration that are participating in
this are like amazed at what has just
been requested. A massive increase in
the compute power that the UAE wants.
And Saxs takes the position that this is
a deal that should be landed. And
Wickoff is coming in and saying, you
know, this is a signature moment for the
president and the new administration.
He's heading over to the Middle East and
he needs deals to sign.
>> But I want to thank his highness making
great progress.
>> Trump goes over to the UAE.
>> I want to also thank his highness shake
takun.
>> There's a big event that Saxs is there.
Whit is there. Shake Takun is there.
Yesterday, the two countries also agreed
to create a path for UAE to buy some of
the world's most advanced AI
semiconductors from
>> and they announced that they reached an
agreement to give them 500,000 chips a
year.
>> This will generate billions and billions
of dollars in business and accelerate
the UAE's plans to become a really major
player in artificial intelligence. And I
read where
>> I remember this announcement. This was
his first big international trip, right?
Where they made this announcement.
That's right. It was a huge event.
>> But this was coming to UAE was very
important. Coming to uh Saudi Arabia and
Qatar was very important to me because
of personal relationships that I had
maybe more than anything else.
>> And it's potentially transformational
for the future of the United Arab
Emirates in terms of its place in the
global economy.
>> Thank you very much.
[Applause]
But wait, okay, what about all the
security concerns? What about all the
concerns about whether these chips were
going to go to China? Did they get
addressed? Did they evaporate?
They made some initial commitments in
the deal that was signed in May like
cyber controls at the data centers and
commitments around who would have access
to these data centers. But they largely
agreed to further negotiate the terms of
the security agreement in a working
group that would be created after the
Trump administration announced the deal.
>> So basically they kicked the can down
the road. They punted it.
>> Yes. And that was very frustrating and
disappointing to some of these skeptics
inside the administration. They were
saying, "We had the most leverage at
this moment. We should have asked, for
example, no more joint military
exercises with China. No more advanced
technology sharing with Chinese
companies that are going to be anywhere
close to your data centers."
>> They wanted those commitments up front.
Sachs and the Trump administration said,
"We'll work on these commitments in the
weeks and months ahead." They are still
being negotiated. Do you think it's too
far to say that punting it suggests that
Sachs and Witoff don't care that much
about the concerns?
>> No. No. I I mean, what I heard from some
White House aids that were supportive of
the deal was that not a single chip is
going to be transferred until they are
confident that the security protocols
are rock solid. And that said, that did
not satisfy the skeptics who wanted
these security terms negotiated up
front. And ultimately, Sachs won that
fight. I just want to posit a theory
though for a minute because what you're
laying out here, it definitely sounds
like the Trump administration eased up
on a concern that the Biden
administration had that even some people
in the Trump administration also shared.
And the concern could be that they eased
up because Trump and Whit had a
financial incentive to give the UAE what
it wants. But could it also be true that
David Sachs and others had a legitimate
non-corrupt debate over the wisest chips
policy? Like rather than keep these
chips from China, they felt like the
wiser thing to do was to make sure the
entire world including China is reliant
on American chips, on American
technology, and needs to get it from us.
The administration recently reversed
course and said that it would give China
some of these chips directly if I'm not
mistaken. So I'm just sort of wondering
how you're thinking about whether this
is problematic or whether this reflects
a change in attitude about sharing chips
or whether some it's some combination or
something else.
>> I think ultimately it is a combination
because there was definitely a clash of
worldviews. There was the Sachs
philosophy and also the philosophy of
Nvidia and I spoke with executives there
that they felt like really the United
States is better off economically and
also in its national security interest
if the US tech stack becomes the global
tech stack. And the way that you do that
is you distribute your technology
globally and the world relies upon it
and you build up the strength of that
tech stack and China is still not going
to get ahead of us is their belief
because we're holding on to most of the
chips domestically. We're only sharing a
relatively small number of them with
UAE. That's the argument that they make.
But this whole thing has become blurry
and complicated because regardless of
this substantive debate that they were
having in the White House, there's $2
billion that is going from UAE to the
Trump and Witco family's business.
>> It's hard not to wonder about the
intentionality of that and the
motivations,
>> right? It's not normal for the president
and his Middle East adviser to have a
financial interest in matters that
they're involved in. I mean, basically
what the concern is, just to put it
really bluntly, is like who is the
president and the administration
representing here? And how can we be
confident the president's own interests
and the interests of his close adviserss
are not playing some kind of role in a
deal that impacts America's economic
security, national security, and many
other facets of the country.
>> That's right. And actually, I heard that
from people within the Trump
administration that they had that same
question. And that's really kind of
startling to me to hear that that comes
from inside the walls that are involved
in these deliberations that they
wondered the same thing. And the
consequences here are so enormous. I
mean, we're talking about technology
that is every day transforming the
world. And the United States has such a
dominant place in developing this
technology. But to throw into that
equation a $2 billion deal that's going
to a company that's owned in part by the
Middle East envoy and the family of the
president, it's just like, how's that
possible? I mean, at a minimum, it
creates an appearance of a conflict of
interest and an appearance of
corruption.
[Music]
It's a blurring of lines that are going
to lead to secondguing that is going to
play out around the interactions with
the Middle East. You know, a key party
in so many decisions now about peace and
war and financial matters. And I mean,
all of these interactions are now being
colored by financial connections to
Trump and his administration.
[Music]
Eric, thank you so much.
>> Thank you, Rachel, for having me.
>> In a statement to the Times, the White
House said that the $2 billion crypto
deal was quote totally unrelated to any
government business. Meanwhile, a
spokesman for Shik Taknun insisted that
his business dealings operate to the
quote highest standards of integrity and
governance.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
On Tuesday, President Trump gave a
56-inute speech full of grievances
against the United Nations to the United
Nations. They ranged from a
malfunctioning escalator at the UN
building to not winning a renovation
contract, even questioning whether the
United Nations should even exist.
>> What is the purpose of the United
Nations? The UN
>> The speech went nearly four times longer
than Trump's allotted time limit during
which he lectured the UN and other
nations about how they were failing.
your countries are going to hell.
>> And
in an emotional return to the airwaves,
Jimmy Kimmel broke his silence Tuesday
night in an opening monologue that was
at turns defiant, joking, and somber,
addressing the controversy over his
remarks on the assassination of Charlie
Kirk that temporarily sidelined Kimmel's
show and ignited a national debate about
free speech.
>> This show is not important. What is
important is that we get to live in a
country that allows us to have a show
like this.
>> Tearing up, he also praised Erica Kirk,
Charlie Kirk's widow, who said on Sunday
that she forgave the person accused of
murdering her husband. Kimmel said that
it touched him deeply.
>> And if there's anything we should take
from this tragedy to carry forward, I
hope it can be that uh and not this.
>> In a truth social post, President Trump
threatened ABC with legal action over
Kimmel's return.
Today's episode was produced by Shannon
Lynn with help from Jessica Chung. It
was edited by Rachel Quester with help
from Paige Cowitt. Contains original
music by Pat McCusker, Marian Lozano,
Rowan Nisto, and Alicia Beup. And was
engineered by Alyssa Moxley. Special
thanks to David Yafi Bellamy.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]